docs/design: add the table partition proposal (#7969)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2018-10-19-table-partition.md

> # Proposal: Table partition

Reviewer: partition -> Partition

> # Proposal: Table partition

Reviewer: Hi test

- Author(s):     [tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
- Last updated:  2018-10-19
- Discussion at: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/7907

## Abstract

This proposal proposes to support the table partition feature.

## Background

> MySQL has the [table partition](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/partitioning.html) feature. If this feature is supported in TiDB, many issues could be addressed. For example, drop ranged partitions could be used to remove old data; partition by hash could address the hot data issue thus improve the write performance; query on partitioned table could be faster than on manual sharding tables because of the partition pruning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL has the [table partition](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/partitioning.html) feature. If this feature is supported in TiDB, many issues could be addressed. For example, drop ranged partitions could be used to remove old data; partition by hash could address the hot data issue and thus the write performance is improved; query on partitioned tables could be faster than on manual sharding tables because of the partition pruning.
```

> MySQL has the [table partition](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/partitioning.html) feature. If this feature is supported in TiDB, many issues could be addressed. For example, drop ranged partitions could be used to remove old data; partition by hash could address the hot data issue and thus the write performance is improved; query on partitioned tables could be faster than on manual sharding tables because of the partition pruning.

Reviewer 2: query on partitioned tables could be faster than unpartitioned tables because of the partition pruning.

## Proposal

Implement the table partition feature step by step. Partition by range first, then partition by hash.

> For current implementation in this proposal, subpartition is not considered. Reorganize partition involving data movement remains unsupported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For current implementation in this proposal, subpartition is not considered. Reorganizing partition involving data movement remains unsupported.
```

## Rationale

> The new table partition feature should be problem-solving oriented, and it may not cover all MySQL counterpart at first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new table partition feature should be problem-solving oriented, and it may not cover all MySQL counterparts at first.
```

The syntax should be always MySQL compatible, as TiDB's promise from the beginning.

> For those partitioned tables which contain unimplemented features, TiDB parses the SQL but ignores its partition attributes, regards the table as a normal one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those partitioned tables which contain unimplemented features, TiDB parses the SQL statements but ignores its partition attributes, and regards the table as a normal one.
```

## Compatibility

In the old version, TiDB parses `create table ... partition by ...` and handles it as a normal table; the `partition by ...` option is discarded.
Now that table partition is added, and we have to consider the following cases:

1. New TiDB runs on the old cluster data
2. Old TiDB runs on the new cluster data
3. The upgrading phases during part of the features is implemented

A new `PartitionInfo.Enable` flag is introduced to the `TableInfo`, and it's persisted.
New TiDB running on the old cluster will check this flag and find `PartitionInfo.Enable` is false, so it handles the table as before.
Old TiDB will not be able to run with partitioned table data, so **the upgrading is incompatible**. (Note that if no partitioned table is created with the new TiDB, i.e, the feature is not used, the cluster is still able to be degraded)

> If partition by range is implemented while partition by hash is not, TiDB will not set `PartitionInfo.Enable` to true for `create table ... partition by hash ...`, but it set `PartitionInfo.Enable` to true for `create table ... partition by range ...`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If partition by range is implemented while partition by hash is not, TiDB does not set `PartitionInfo.Enable` to true for `create table ... partition by hash ...`, but it sets `PartitionInfo.Enable` to true for `create table ... partition by range ...`.
```

In a word, only when the persisted `PartitionInfo.Enable` is true, and the code could handle partitioned table, will the table partition feature be supported.

## Implementation

### How the partitioned table is stored

There are two levels of mapping in TiDB: SQL data to a logical key range, logical key range to the physical storage.
When TiDB maps table data to key-value storage, it first encodes `table id + row id` as key, row data as value. Then the logical key range is split into regions and stored into TiKV.

> Table partition works on the first level of mapping, partition ID will be made equivalent of the table ID. A partitioned table row uses `partition id + row id` as encoded key.

Reviewer 2: Please mention that `PartitionID` is unique in cluster scope.

The relationship of Table ID and partition ID should be maintained in the `TableInfo`.

When a new row is inserted into a partitioned table, if the row doesn't belong to any partition of the table, the operation fails.

> Refer to the MySQL document https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/partitioning-handling-nulls.html for handling `NULL` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [MySQL document](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/partitioning-handling-nulls.html) for handling `NULL` values.
```

> ### How to read from the partitioned table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to read data from the partitioned table
```

```
create table t (id int) partition by range (id)
(partition p1 values less than (10),
partition p2 values less than (20),
partition p3 values less than (30))
```

This SQL query

```
select * from t 
```

is equal to

```
select * from (union all
select * from p1 where id < 10
select * from p2 where id < 20
select * from p3 where id < 30)
```

> During logical optimize phase, the `DataSource` plan is translated into `UnionAll`, and then each partition generates its own `TableReader` in the physical optimize phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the logical optimization phase, the `DataSource` plan is translated into `UnionAll`, and then each partition generates its own `TableReader` in the physical optimization phase.
```

> During the logical optimization phase, the `DataSource` plan is translated into `UnionAll`, and then each partition generates its own `TableReader` in the physical optimization phase.

Reviewer 2: `DataSource` plan -> `DataSource` operator
`UnionAll` -> `UnionAll` operator

The drawbacks of this implementation are:

> * If the table has many partitions, there will be many readers, then `explain` result is not friendly to user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the table has many partitions, there will be many readers, and then the `explain` result is not friendly to the user
```

> * `UnionAll` executor can't keep order, so if some executor need ordered result such as `IndexReader`, an extra `Sort` executor is needed

Reviewer: The `UnionAll` executor cannot guarantee that the output results are in order, so if some executor needs an ordered result such as `IndexReader`, an extra `Sort` executor is needed

> * The `UnionAll` executor can't keep order, so if some executor need ordered result such as `IndexReader`, an extra `Sort` executor is needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `UnionAll` executor cannot keep the results in order, so if some executor needs ordered results such as `IndexReader`, an extra `Sort` executor is needed
```

> * The `UnionAll` executor cannot keep the results in order, so if some executor needs ordered results such as `IndexReader`, an extra `Sort` executor is needed

Reviewer 2: We are talking about plan phrase, so there is no `executor`.

If [partition selection](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/partitioning-selection.html) is used, planner should translate table ID to partition ID, and turn off partition pruning.

#### Partition pruning

> During logical optimize phase, after predicate push down, partition pruning is performed.

Reviewer: optimize -> optimization

For range partition, partition pruning is based on the range filter conditions of the partition column. For hash partition, if the filter condition is something like `key = const`, partition pruning could work.

### How to write to the partitioned table

> All the write operation calls functions like `table.AddRecord` eventually, so implement write operation on a partitioned table simply implement this interface method on the `PartitionedTable` struct.

Reviewer: simply implement -> simply implements

> All the write operation calls functions like `table.AddRecord` eventually, so implement write operation on a partitioned table simply implements this interface method on the `PartitionedTable` struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the write operation calls functions like `table.AddRecord` eventually, so implementing the write operation on a partitioned table simply implements this interface method on the `PartitionedTable` struct.
```

> All the write operation calls functions like `table.AddRecord` eventually, so implementing the write operation on a partitioned table simply implements this interface method on the `PartitionedTable` struct.

Reviewer 2: singular? or plural？
> All the write operation calls

> `PartitionedTable` implements the `table.Table` interface, overloads the `AddRecord` method. It also comes with a `locatePartition` method, to decide which partition a row should be insert into.

Reviewer: `PartitionedTable` implements the `table.Table` interface **and** overloads the `AddRecord` method. It also comes with a `locatePartition` method, to decide which partition a row should be **inserted** into.

> `PartitionedTable` implements the `table.Table` interface, and overloads the `AddRecord` method. It also comes with a `locatePartition` method, to decide which partition a row should be insert into.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PartitionedTable` implements the `table.Table` interface, and overloads the `AddRecord` method. It also comes with a `locatePartition` method, to decide which partition a row should be inserted into.
```

> Each partition maintains its own index data, the insert operation should keep data and index consistent.

Reviewer: Each partition maintains its own index data **and** the insert operation should keep data and index consistent.

### DDL operations

> DROP/TRUNCATE/ADD, those three operations works on range partition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DROP/TRUNCATE/ADD, those three operations work on range partition.
```

> `DROP PARTITION` is similar to `DROP TABLE`, except that partition ID is used. `TableInfo` should be updated after the drop partition operation. Note that if one want to drop the last partition in a table, he should use drop table rather than drop partition.

Reviewer: `DROP PARTITION` is similar to `DROP TABLE`, except that partition ID is used. `TableInfo` should be updated after the drop partition operation. Note that if one **wants** to drop the last partition in a table, he should use drop table rather than drop partition.

> Trancate partition truncates all data and index in a partition, but keep the partition itself.

Reviewer: Trancate partition truncates all data and **indexes** in a partition, but **keeps** the partition itself.

### Partition management

> There are many statements for partition management, current implementation could just parse the SQL and ignore them.

Reviewer: There are many statements for partition management, **but the** current implementation could just parse the SQL and ignore them.

> There are many statements for partition management, but the current implementation could just parse the SQL and ignore them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many statements for partition management, but the current implementation could just parse the SQL statements and ignore them.
```

```
ALTER TABLE ... REBUILD PARTITION ...
ALTER TABLE ... OPTIMIZE PARTITION ...
ALTER TABLE ... ANALYZE PARTITION ...
ALTER TABLE ... REPAIR PARTITION ...
ALTER TABLE ... CHECK PARTITION ...
ALTER TABLE ... DROP/TRUNCATE PARTITION
ALTER TABLE ... ADD PARTITION
SHOW CREATE TABLE
SHOW TABLE STATUS
INFORMATION_SCHEMA.PARTITIONS table
```

### Limitations

> Refer to MySQL https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/partitioning-limitations.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [Restrictions and Limitations on Partitioning](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/partitioning-limitations.html)
```

> The partition key must be an integer column, or an expression which evaluate to an integer (or NULL).

Reviewer: The partition key must be an integer column, or an expression which **revolves** to an integer (or NULL).

> The partition key must not be a subquery, even a subquery which evaluate to an integer.

Reviewer: The partition key **cannot** be a subquery, even a subquery which **revolves** to an integer.

> The partition key must not be a subquery, even a subquery which resolves to an integer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The partition key cannot be a subquery, even a subquery which resolves to an integer.
```

The maximum partitions count of a table is 8192 in MySQL, but 1024 in TiDB.

> Functions allowed in partition expressions https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/partitioning-limitations-functions.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Functions allowed in partition expressions](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/partitioning-limitations-functions.html)
```

Reviewer: Note:

- "must not" means "千万不要" in Chinese. It means prohibition. For example, you must not cross the road when the light is red.
- Do not confuse "SQL" with "SQL statement". SQL is a language.
